so before introducing our uh our speaker
today uh for the mar s Brower lecture I
want to say a few words about Mark
Brower uh many of you here in the room
knew him quite
well uh he was a Hematology
Oncology uh oncologist
clinician uh specializing in medical
oncology and this put him at the center
of a complex challenging diagnosis of
treatment and protocol for hundreds of
patients seen here at w Cornell and in
nework Presbyterian including those with
bleeding disorders hematological
malignancies and breast cancer many of
these patients are alive today because
of his uh interventions his guidance and
his ability to administer the latest
advancements in treatment and medical
protocols he was uh beloved by his
patients and also by his colleagues it
was an untimely death uh that he was uh
killed by an auto
accident uh at at a relatively young
age uh and in memory of his um really
his his uh impact here uh and uh the
love of his patients and colleagues uh
Demarcus Brower MD lecture in hematology
and oncology was established through
donations of uh former patients and
fellow
Physicians and and this has allowed us
to endow uh the lecture series uh this
will be the third uh Brower
lecture so a bit about uh our lecture
today uh Sid
muckery I've known Sid uh I think I knew
him a bit even when he was a medical
student certainly as a
trainee uh at uh at Harvard Medical
School uh so Sid got his BS in at
Stanford
University and uh there he was awarded a
road scholarship to go to o for where he
got a
PhD uh with a focus I think in uh in
Biochemistry or uh maybe he can correct
that but I think that's what it was uh
in
Immunology uh he then came to Harvard
Medical School as a medical uh to get an
MD uh and then stayed on at Mass General
where he did his residency in
Fellowship now you can imagine uh put I
think there are many uh residents and
interns here uh that those are times in
which you find yourself incredibly busy
uh but Sid being a person of almost uh
unbelievable energy uh decided to write
a book while doing his residency and
internship uh and this book you will for
those youve seen it you realize it's not
just a small little
book uh it's actually a fairly large
book uh the title of book was the
emperor of all maladies biography of
cancer and this book was so successful
that it uh he was awarded U uh the P
surprise a year after it was
published uh and ultimately it went on
to become a uh a series by Ken Burns in
public television
PBS uh which also was very well
received
uh uh Sid has gone on to write addition
books uh the latest being the Gene and
intimate history which was just
published this
year so in addition of course to his
notable career literary career uh Sid's
real job he actually has a
job uh is to treat
patients and to do basic science and
translational science to try to figure
out new therapies and his focus is
primarily in the area of
AML uh where he and I are actually
starting to collaborate ation now uh so
this is a really remarkable man who uh
has had excellence in many different
areas now on the faculty at Columbia our
sister institution with
nyp uh and uh it's a great honor to
introduce uh Sid to give the
lecture thank
you so so uh thank you so much um it's a
real honor to be here um when Lou first
asked me to give the lecture give this
talk um I just wrote a one-word email
back to him I said yes because anything
that Lou asks I just say yes reflexively
and then look at my schedule so um but
that's really a testament to the kind of
um scientist and leader that he is and
and the the way you've the institution
has um has really been an astonishing
place for him I have one small anecdote
about Cornell in particular which is
relevant which is that when I was
working on on the emper maladies um I
wanted to see papa Nicola's microscope
now I don't know how many of you know
that just a few floors above is Papa
nikola's microscope and you can actually
call someone I don't remember who it was
the librarian of the papa Nikola library
and if you should so desire you can not
only look at the microscope you can
actually look at the slides that Papa
Nikola made from the first series of
patients to diag
early cervical cancer it's an
astonishing thing which is just three
floors above you so I was at Harvard
then I was at medical school then so I
took a train down and I I knew the
institution and went right up to this
Library which is impossible to find
basically if you take three elevators
and it's tucked in somewhere how many of
you been to that
place two people astonishing
three I would recommend doing so because
you know of course that's the one of the
founding principles of
um the diagnosis of early cancer
pre-invasive cancer it's really
transformed our idea of how to take care
of patients before their cancer has
become invasive and has I mean papsmear
has saved the lives of hundreds of
thousands if not millions of women in
the United States and around the world
certainly millions of women around the
world so an important institution but
what I cannot find though is
pointer I you pointed out to me yeah
thank you about it so uh just a couple
of thoughts before I I start the talk I
mean this is meant to be a very general
talk I will not talk about in great
detail about the much of the scientific
work that we've um started doing uh
we're a young laboratory but we've had
the opportunity to collaborate very
widely including with the L lab um I'm
going to speak much more generally about
what I think is is a kind of landscape
view of what is happening in the world
of cancer I want this to be a general
talk there'll certainly be enough
scientific detail I think to to to carry
out a further conversation if people
want to do this and for for for reasons
you'll understand very soon um I call
this personal medicine and the public
good really in personal medicine I'll be
talking about cancer um although some of
these principles I hope and and um I'm
confident will be actually applicable
outside um cancer to a much larger
context um uh of the question so I
wanted to start with an important um uh
slide which I think hammers home a very
essential point this is uh uh mortality
in the United States um from all
diseases so all mortality in the United
States and as you can see from the 1900s
to 1990s uh somewhere it stops around
1998 and you can see a general decline
of um mortality adjusted for various
factors including age um and that
General decline of course is something
you've seen in our own lifetimes being
transformative this peak for many of you
of course corresponds to the great
influenza pandemic but since then there
has been a general decline which is very
reassuring that's that first curve
here's what's more interesting and more
complicated if you look at the
Infectious component of that so the
contribution of infectious diseases to
the decline in mortality what you find
is that this curve virtually completely
mirrors this
curve whereas the non-infectious the
chronic diseases looks more or less like
a flat
line that's the challenge actually that
we're facing is that as our as the
epidem epidem iology of diseases
transforms in this country from nonin
from infectious to non-infectious or
chronic causes our contribution in all
of medicine in public health to the
decline of mortality from these
non-infectious causes has actually been
pretty minimal so the question meanwhile
of course we have giant projects
including moonshot projects personalized
medicine projects which of course hope
to transform the management and
treatment of chronic diseases and the
question we should ask ourselves is okay
well what have we done so far what's the
map of these chronic diseases been in
fact the track record has been very very
sobering in recent times of course we
have seen um a a a rise in one
particular disease I want to focus on
that as a mechanism of contrast and that
is as very many of you know AIDS this is
the rise and uh subsequent decline of
AIDS related HIV AIDS related mortality
in the United States rising and
declining in the 1980 1990s most of that
is a combination of Public Health
campaigns and effective anti-retroviral
therapies and you see this in Greater
detail over here rising in the 1990s
AIDS deaths then peaking in the mid
1990s late 1990s and then falling and
what's interesting about it is that
there's been a a slight dip in this
curve as uh now some resistance has
developed and also the public health
campaigns against HIV some pockets of
the city some pockets of some cities
have been declining all of this is very
important to remember because I'm going
to give you what I think is uh a brief
history of this so I'm just going to
talk about this very generally and I
want to contrast this with um some
important themes in cancer so a very
brief history here so early 1980s we we
now know that the epidemic breaks out in
New York City San Francisco and other
places uh in the early 1990 days it's
tracked to a bloodborne or sexual
transmission the virus is identified
as I said a vast Public Health campaign
to prevent transmission is um is
launched anti retrovirals are deployed
and resistance develops to antiretrovial
therapies comination therapies uh are
deployed in the 1990s leading to um in
many cases a a spectacular control of
the
virus antiretrovial therapies are partly
personalized by the 2000s and by that I
mean that now there are there are
mechanisms to test for resistance
through certain viral um uh to certain
anti- retrovirals and viruses whereas so
so it's partly personalized at the same
time HIV becomes a global pandemic now
this is probably the in the United
States as I showed you before one of the
most recent um powerful uh medical
scientific uh Crusades uh followed by
successes But realize here that the
personalization aspect of this um
deploying anti- retrovirals in a
mechanism that is personally to an
individual patient really lies at lies
at the tail end of all of this and if
anything has has really become partly uh
the late comer or late addition to the
uh to the deployment of an effective
campaign both public health wise and um
and in terms of clinical medicine
against uh HIV AIDS it's an important
lesson to remember because in our
lifetimes we've only seen the arrival of
personalized medicine for that sector
quite
late um so what about uh cancer then um
well the history of cancer um which is
covered in great depth um both in
Emperor maladies and in the in the
kenburns documentary um can be told from
ancient times we know that cancer is a
disease that's been present uh really in
some of the most the oldest specimens um
uh that we have of of uh of of human
pathology it's mentioned in some of the
oldest books uh of of medicine that that
exist um but really to some extent the
the modern era of cancer the more
contemporary understanding of cancer
begins with the definition of what may
have been the the first identification
of cause and this is Rudolph verow Who
as a young man um began to understand or
realize and again uh people might be
people in this field um might have the
opportunity sometime to go to Berlin and
look at workhouse specimens um which are
also publicly available for public view
much like Papa Nicolas is are um uh but
work cow realized that in fact uh
regardless of the tissue of origin brain
cancer liver cancer and other cancers
that fundamentally there was a a a a
process a pathological process that
United all of these Cancers and that was
the uh abundant overgrowth of cells
cells growing where they shouldn't be
growing cells
growing in in arenas where they
shouldn't be growing anatomically out of
place but also in in manners in in
physiological manners that that were not
that did not seem uh with respect to did
not seem to respect normal tissue
boundaries um Vera's second uh U Insight
is perhaps even deeper verow made the
argument uh an argument which which has
very deep relevance even today verka
made the argument that all cells must
arise from other cells on Miss cellular
cellular as he put it and you could say
well this is relatively obvious but in
Wow's time this was not obvious there
were all sorts of theories as to how
cells arose so verow made the argument
that generally in all tissues cells
arose from prior cells and if you take
that argument at face value which which
and workout is obviously right in saying
that it turns out that you it leads to a
very profound realization about cancer
and that is that a cancer cell must
necessarily have risen from a normal
cell and if that's true if a cancer cell
must arise from a normal cell then
something must have happened to a normal
cell to make it into a malignant cell
some process some blackbox process must
have happened to to transform a normal
cell to malignant cell now that idea
what that what that something was is of
course the the idea that Rings through
much of this Century of cancer medicine
cancer biology and cancer research what
is that something that allows a
perfectly good citizen normal cell to be
transformed into an abnormal cell which
divides and proliferates abnormally has
abnormal metabolism has abnormal
characteristics of growth invades tissue
and ultimately causes death keep that
thought in mind because we'll come back
to that over and over again in the
meantime without the knowledge of what
that abnor abnormality was in the
absence of the knowledge of what the
cause was the first attempts were made
to extricate or extrae cancers U without
addressing their cause in other words if
you could cut the cancer out you could
then have possibly removed the cancer in
its entirety and as we said before the
closer you got to the the cell of origin
the site of origin the earlier you got
to the intervention the more successful
the chances of that therapy um this led
very soon after workhouse observations
independently really to the Golden Age
of cancer surgery um this is a picture
from a clinic in Vienna with Bill Roth
one of the great cancer surgeons
performing uh among the first uh extrap
of cancer the removal of cancer from its
organ um in this case abdominal cancers
with B Roth attack and Bill rot student
as many of you know briefly but um one
of Bill rot students was William Stewart
h
um Halstead um again as many of you
might remember or know um was really a
champion of cancer surgery he was one of
the great cancer surgeons practiced um
in New York and then moved to to
Baltimore um where he launched um what
he would call and others would call a
radical attack on cancer um Can Halstead
believed uh uh for importantly for his
time HED believe that the reason that
patients were not being surgically cured
for of breast cancer this was the cancer
that he was most interested in was
because they were not being treated
aggressively enough the cancer was not
being removed aggressively enough and
Halstead and his students therefore uh
launched um a increasingly aggressive
surgical attacks on cancer leading to
the ultra radical the radical the ultra
radical and the super radical
mastectomies um in an attempt as he put
it to completely remove the tumor and
thereby rid the patient of the cancer um
theide a the hypothesis was a powerful
hypothesis it sees the imagination of of
of a nation and and a world increasingly
obsessed with cancer um but sadly the
hypothesis was not completely correct
and it was not correct because for
reasons that we understand now and that
is that for women in whom the cancer had
already spread beyond the breast in
otherwi in other words women for women
who had metastatic cancer to begin with
the more aggressive removal of local
cancer makes no difference the cancer is
already out of the local site and
ironically for women in whom the cancer
has not spread outside the local site
more aggressive surgery is simply more
aggressive without giving them the
benefit of local surgery so in fact it's
a perfect mismatch for both the
circumstances in which a patient might
present with cancer the problem was that
it was impossible to run that trial to
prove this point because partly because
of the culture of medicine we come back
to this idea over and over again but but
the culture of medicine was inherently
resistant to testing a hypothesis that
seemed very true at face value and in
fact patients themselves would rather
never be randomized to the radical to
the non-radical arm of the surgery they
didn't want the less radical um surgical
operation and it was impossible to run
the trial ultimately it took about a 100
years after Halstead had launched the
mastectomy to run the first trials
comparing radical mastectomy with local
mast ectomy plus radiation and that
trial was negative um it was so
surprising a result that it was repeated
at 10 years and at 20 years and it still
remain negative and has become one of
the cornerstones now why is this
relevant it's relevant because um even
from this early um understanding it's it
became quite clear that an individual
cancer had to be treated on a stage by-
stage basis in other words deeper
information about an individual cancer
spread in in this case outside or within
the localized uh confines of the breast
was relevant in launching the
appropriate treatment regimen so right
from the very start even with the
surgical history of cancer there was a
there was an attempt early on to try to
Stage patients and what is staging aside
from a very very crude mechanism of
personalizing cancer therapy so in fact
what we call staging today is really
step one of personalized cancer therapy
because it is an attempt to try to
understand where the patient sits on the
spe spectum of early disease
intermediate disease maybe late
metastatic disease to try to direct
appropriate therapy for those patients
well so if surgery uh was trying to
reach its own uh make its own peace with
um staged disease appropriate staging of
cancer um there was also in medicine in
medical oncology also the same kind of
realization was slowly Dawning we've
turned the clock back a little bit as
early as the um as early as the 1900s
Paul Erick um the chemist had made the
argument that aside from the surgical
extrap of cancer there could be
medicines that would specifically kill
cancer cells and therefore be systemic
medicines they would go through the
whole body and the chemicals would Now
kill cancer cells as opposed to remove
removing the cancer cell and as many of
you know one of the first chemicals to
achieve uh this was they were they were
borrowed from the world of chemical
poisons uh mustard gas at Bari was noted
to be a potent toxin for hemat OIC cells
um in particular lymphoid and to some
extent myoid cells and very soon these
kinds of gases mustard gases and other
poisons chemical poisons were used um in
smaller doses to treat patients and send
them into remissions of cancer so the
the early history of chemotherapy really
begins with the deployment of empirical
poisons poisons found empirically from
war gases from other toxins and the use
of those toxins to try and kill cancer
cells um to try to
get sustained remissions and potential
cures again why is this important it's
important because if we go back to
virous idea of transformation recall
that none of these uh therapies none of
these uh empirical therapies have really
any dependence on an understanding of
that process of transformation there's
no understanding built in to any of
these chemicals about what causes the um
movement or the transformation of a
normal cell into a malignant cell these
uh most of these were Inhibitors of
growth and so what they attack is the
fener type of cancer they attack what
happens as a result of the consequence
of transformation they're not in any way
directed towards un understanding or
treating the causal mechanisms of
carcinogenesis at least with these
poisonous chemicals nonetheless they
were very successful in in in instances
and particularly successful in
combination therapy so um uh at the
National Cancer Institute Emil fry and
EM fry in the 1950s were able to now
combine not one but several of these
empirically found um chemical poisons
often um often in combination often with
deep toxicities uh in this case and in
their case with uh childhood
lymphoblastic leukemia Al and um were
able to lengthen uh the remissions and
achieve in fact complete cures of
patients with childhood all with
empirically derived uh combination
chemotherapies
and a similar principles were applied to
um Hodgkins disease this is Henry Kaplan
uh in at the NCI and then subsequently
at Stanford now combining radiation
therapy with um some of these chemical
uh chemical toxins um to get uh
sustained cures for late stage Hodgkins
disease as well similar principles were
also applied to breast cancer although
with less uh less effect or or less
success nonetheless this led to a um a a
a Wellspring of interest in the usage of
combination chemotherapies combined with
surgery and radiation to potentially
cure all cancers um leading to in 1969
this um public advertisement from um the
uh what would eventually be called the
the larit the citizens committee for the
conquest of cancer which says Mr Nixon
you can cure cancer notice a single C
cure single C cancer um one cancer one
cure um somehow or the other like locks
and keys uh combinations of of chemical
therapies used in concert with surg s
surgery and radiation um would now cause
all cancers to yield in some process and
if you read the fine text this is
printed in 1969 if you read the fine
text the outermost uh edge of that was
10 years so by 1979 this advertisement
would have you believe that all cancers
would be completely conquered uh using
this kind of strategy well of course
that did not happen um this is the rise
in the National Cancer Institute budget
uh during this period of time going up
from U just a smattering of a million
dollars to several billion dollar as you
know um over time and this is the um the
the the flattening in blue for men for
men and for women the flattening of
cancer related mortality but not that
rapid decline that had been seen for
infectious diseases that I showed you in
front or for that matter for
um not even a for men and women again a
rather modest uh change the red curve
shows the expected um uh rise in in in
incidents and most of this as many of
you might know was because of a decrease
in lung and bronchus cancer from uh
smoking cessation so anti-smoking Public
Health campaigns uh drove down the
mortality from lung cancer and bronchus
cancer so much of this flattening is
related to this although certainly um
other other things have contributed
including a decline um uh in cancers of
the prostate um cancers of uh leukemias
which are driven by treatment new
treatment paradigms um and other cancers
including breast cancer so by the 1970
mid 1970s by the early 1980s the
question had returned to some extent the
field had returned back to the drawing
board to ask the question what should
happen next in terms of our uh
understanding of cancer and how would
that understanding be used to motivate a
new series of of attacks on cancer
whether they be towards prevention or
treatment or
cure well the the uh the the the
question of of what the what the
phenomenon of cancer was caused by how
cancer became how that transformation
occurred um as verka had pointed out
went back to observations that were made
really throughout the uh early 20th
century and even before the 20th century
it was well known that heredity
contributed to cancer this is a picture
of uh Hilaria Dua um who uh was a
Brazilian opthalmologist who noted that
cancer ran uh in families um in fact it
would turn out later that this was a a
very very important genetic link um we
we'll talk about that later but uh uh uh
the Brazilian opthalmologist noticed
that there was clearly a hereditary
predisposition to cancer um several
other hereditary predisposition
syndromes to cancer were subsequently
identified clearly implicating that
genes Were Somehow related to cancer um
although it was not clear why um long
before uh these families had been
identified um pral pot um in the in in
England had noted that U chimney sweeps
had a striking incidence of scrotal
cancer and P pot made the uh observation
that this must be because of an
environmental substance um which he in
fact called a carcinogen um that was
causing this
uh this increase in in cancer
particularly in that population of
exposed uh scrotal um uh chimney sweeps
um there was long known that there was
an element of chance um and of course
down the road here at the Rockefeller
pton Rouse um identified viruses that
were linked to cancer so somehow or the
other whatever the cause of cancer was
had to had to integrate theories of
heredity environment chance and and
viruses and that um moment really came
in the uh 1980s uh late 1970s into the
1980s when the hypothesis was made that
mutations um in growth controlling genes
um subsequently other genes that are
also controll growth maybe through
secondary processes but mutations in
growth controlling genes cause cancer um
this there were many actors in in this
I've identified some people Harold
barasu is now at Cornell but golstein
Bob Weinberg there's a whole list of
names here many prizes many important
awards for this um for this process um
and
um Harold himself put it very nicely
borrowing from uh from baywolf thereby
describing cancer as a distorted version
of our normal selves
um referring to the idea that basically
the very same genes that play a vital
role in the normal physiology of cells
the genes that control embryogenesis
genes that might control um the way
cells respond to each other how they
stop growing when they contact each
other uh the way cells respond to their
uh in environments Etc the normal
physiology is distorted mutations are
when mutations occur uh you ultimately
get um a cell that it does not uh know
how to stop growing um does not respond
to normal signals and has acquires
autonomous growth um thereby unifying
much of this and this of course
explained how all of these different
phenomena could cause cancer as it
Center the mutations could be
inherited um in in the in the case of
familial cancer syndromes they would
come from your parents um in the case of
the environment the environment would
create these mutations um you could
acquire the mutations by chance when
cells divide there's a natural error in
copying genes and certainly viruses
could also introduce these mutations
exogenously into cells so all of a
sudden the mystery of multiple causes
con verged onto the idea that mutations
in growth controlling genes cause cancer
I won't spend a lot of time describing
these mutations or describing these
genes most of them are familiar to
people who work in uh cancer in this
audience so the question then was okay
so if alterations in growth controlling
genes cause cancer how many are there
how common are they is there one gene is
there one gene per cancer is it one gene
for breast cancer one gene for uh
leukemia one gene for lung cancer Etc or
what is the spectrum of mutations again
for people in this audience who are now
living in the post genomic ERA this
seems like an obvious question but in
the 1980s this was a very important
question and there were lots of
difference opinion differences of
opinions people thought breast cancer
had a master Gene that was mutated lung
cancer had a master Gene that was
mutated or maybe they were common to all
cancers um many people um including most
importantly but vogelstein group and
other groups showed that there was not
one gene but many genes even in a single
cancer multiple genes needed to be
mutated in fact a cell did not U
suddenly wake up one morning and undergo
the process of transformation that verka
had described it in fact slouched
towards transformation multiple
mutations were accumulated in cells um
in this case a normal cell slowly
transforming into a into a carcinoma um
uh through a series of mutations in in
well- defined events in genes so that
therefore begs the question um if there
are many genes then now the question is
how are they what combinations are
present in individual cancers or in
individual cells of a cancer cancer
everyone with me so far so we're now at
a moment where we're beginning to now
look Beyond uh individual genes in
cancer towards genomes of cancers and
that really that had to wait for the
technology to catch up that technology
caught up the capacity to sequence not
one gene but multiple genes in a single
um cancer specimen uh eventually caught
up in the 1990s and towards the 2000s
leading to a real genetic picture of
cancer and we're going to pause for a
moment to try to describe that as simply
as possible so here is one sort of
schematic of this um uh um so if you
imagine the human genome stretching from
its very first Gene like a snake on a
blank sheet of paper and the very last
Gene is on this corner and you have a
patient let's say with breast cancer who
now comes to the clinic and you have the
capacity as we now do to look um at the
entire genome or perhaps um at the um
what's called the exome of these patient
so the active part the of of the genome
and Mark with a DOT um every single
genetic mutation that occurs so this is
just a schematic or an abstraction um of
of the actual kind of information that
you get and you mark in this one woman
with breast cancer you Mark 1 2 3 4 5 6
7 eight genes um uh that are mutated in
her breast cancer compared to her uh the
the Baseline genome that she has the
normal genome that she inherits um now
imagine that her identical twin also
develops breast cancer she develops
breast cancer
um maybe at the same period of time the
lesions look exactly the same under the
microscope um so they're both classified
in similar ways pathologically and yet
when you look at her genetic uh
fingerprint of the identical breast can
identical looking breast cancer you find
that the genetic fingerprint is similar
perhaps but is different in a couple of
genes so now you have basically in this
particular patient with a similar
looking breast cancer the fingerprint
the genetic uh fingerprint is different
and for another patient patient um with
also with breast cancer the genetic
fingerprint might be yet different so
here is a um um a an important conundrum
which I think has begins to outline some
of the problems one of the problems that
we think about in cancer and that is
that every individual specimen of cancer
is its own disease or every individual
specimen of cancer is its own specimen
of cancer and the challenge I think for
cancer biology is to find a paradigm in
another disease where every single
example of the disease is its own
example of a disease um that is where
the one of the challenges not the only
challenge but that is one of the
challenges in cancer um is where the N
of the number of patients equals n of
the number of variants of disease and
that challenge has now made itself very
apparent as we sequence cancer genomes
even more deeply um what you can do
however is you can begin to organize
this information so one way to organize
this information is to take multiple
specimens of let's say breast cancer
Alone um and take make big Peaks out of
common uh mutations small Peaks out of
uncommon mutations and obviously less
small Peaks out of the least common
mutations and you get a map that looks
like this this is work done by B Vin but
again others have replicated this work
I'll show you some of our own work in
leukemia um so the it looks like this
this is a kind of a schematic map of in
this case coloral cancer which with big
Peaks corresponding to very commonly mut
mut genes small Peaks corresponding to
less commonly mutated genes and single
dots so this one dot would be mutated in
one particular specimen of breast cancer
coloral cancer sorry but not in other
specimens of Choral cancer so everyone
with me so far so this of course
captures the level of diversity but also
combines it into a single map of a in in
this case one particular cancer such as
colal cancer and this just points out
that level of diversity now what does
that mean in terms of individ our own
data what does that mean in terms of
individual patients here's a a much more
limited panel I think there are 1 2 3
four five six maybe eight or nine genes
here um but so one patient this is
patient one has a mutation in this Gene
this Gene and this Gene so this is one
patient a patient two um interestingly
has exactly the opposite so where there
are holes here there are mutations here
and yet when you look at them in this
case we're looking at them in a clinical
trial both seem to Cluster in response
in One Direction whereas patients don't
cluster in another Direction so what has
become in this case um it's become a
kind of mix and match problem of
gigantic proportions where you're trying
to find the mutational spectrum that a
patient has and match it to therapy on
one hand and figuring trying to figure
out how to make these matches in a way
that are sensible that makes sense in
terms of biological Pathways and other
uh par parameters of the
cancer so has that approach worked it's
worked very well in circumstances where
the mutation is very well defined and
you happen to have a powerful inhibitor
against that uh particular Gene that's
driving the the physiology of the cancer
so here's the probably the best known
example of that um and that's from a
disease called chronic myogenous
leukemia I've used the same schematic
plot from the color rectal cancer but of
course this would be unique to Chronic
myogenous lukemia you have different
genes that are Peaks and and troughs um
in this case a particular genetic
mutation a fusion between two genes uh
was found to be very very common across
virtually all cases of chronic myogenous
leukemia and a an inhibitor a chemical
inhibitor was synthesized that would sit
in the Clift of the protein made by this
uh by this mutated Gene um this uh is is
a drug called iMat nib or glec this is
amazingly it's it's a it's a chemical
entirely synthesized by humans it's an
astonishing thing so this is a chemical
made from scratch by humans to large
into this Clift it was discovered
through a screening process but found to
Lodge into the Clift of of the protein
made by this mutation and um many of you
know that um that this led to one of the
most successful treatment paradigms for
this particular disease chronic
myogenous leukemia here's the here's the
pivotal clinical trial comparing
chemotherapy this is a Kaplan Meer plot
looking at death or relapse actually
survival in this case uh with
traditional chemotherapy um uh comparing
with an old therapy interferon versus
glec where you really don't see um that
U you see basically prolonged survival
and this is a very very significant
result in cancer so by the 1990s and
2000s actually by the 2000s I should say
the idea that you know we could find
glex for every Cancer became a very
tantalizing idea that you would gen
genetically profile the cancer find the
driving mutation a common driving
mutation or a common driving uh a
genetic mechanism for that behind that
cancer and you would be able to find an
inhibitor of some sort that would turn
it off like a lock and key was that was
a dominant Paradigm and it was embraced
very successfully by the can by the
world of cancer ultimately being known
with various names included targeted
therapy um was a very very dominant
Paradigm and this was repeated somewhat
um in other cancers although I would say
in all fairness not with the spectacular
success of chronic myogenous leukemia
this is um uh this is again a schematic
of of breast cancer um and the uh her
two uh Gene um usually an
amplification um um we we as a community
of of scientists made from scratch a a
molecule that binds and inhibits um or
and kills excuse me this these cancer
cells this is a picture of Barbara
Bradfield she was patient zero to take
her septin she was basically the first
patient to receive her septin um and is
still alive today she had metastatic U
herto positive breast cancer um was
treated with a taxol and her septin and
in fact this picture this is my picture
I sent her I contacted her when I wrote
the book um and I sent her a package of
her septin um and her husband took a
picture in her backyard she's still
alive still alive today actually um
being the first person to enroll in the
clinical trial um in California for um
for her to positive breast cancer and
here is the result of uh of the initial
trial um of um of her septin in um
breast cancer again showing very clearly
in the herceptin treated group versus
the uh the uh the non-treated group a
clear benefit in survival um in the
initial trial unfortunately many
patients would develop relap resistance
and relapse but was astonishing and Lou
and I were talking about this we now
know that if you treat patients in an
early stage if you remove her two
positive tumor in an early stage and
give her septin in what's called an ad
setting to basically uh you can imagine
to uh remove any microscopic or or
residual cancer um um exactly uh the the
the Paradigm that had been used in the
past uh for other forms of chemotherapy
we now know that that that is has a has
a remarkable effect so in many cases
they achieve very very long-term relapse
free uh survival so this is really being
a paradigm shift in her two positive um
breast
cancer the problem of course was that
this approach of somewhat you know
genetically annotating based on um based
on
uh individual genetic mutations or Gene
signals or markers in individual cancer
cells was very successful when you could
have a medicine against that GC is a
great example of that herceptin is a
great example of something that marks
those particular tumor cells and the the
in that case an antibody um is very
helpful but the question very often it
was very hard to find such Inhibitors
such exquisitely targeted Inhibitors of
these genes so one question that REM
that was was raised at this time had we
actually raised long before is rather
than inhibiting this uh these individual
genes where you could inhibit them is it
possible to inhibit the network or
Pathways of communication that exists so
obviously for a cell to uh for a given
cancer cell to start acquiring its
malignant uh physiology um the mutated
genes in that cancer cells May
communicate with with with each other
forming Pathways um and these Pathways
may also be targets for uh for various
drug therapies in other words the
pathway would be activated in cancer
cells for some reason be less active in
normal cells and if you could somehow
modulate The increased activity in the
cancer cell sparing the activity in the
normal cell then you would have an
anti-cancer therapy it would also be
somewhat personalized in the sense that
they would be attacking a pathway that
was unique to that one particular cancer
cell um so you can imagine you can
analog uh you can create an analogy here
to to the parts of a very complex
machine so rather than of course C
capturing the mutations in individual um
cancers that you would be attacking in
this case the physiology of cancer
metabolism growth immune Escape Etc and
just to point that out you know you can
imagine the cancer cell is a complex
machine that ultimately has disrupted
metabolism disrupted growth that you
would attack some part of it that
controlled some aspect of the machine
that controlled one feature versus the
other so for instance the aspect that
might control its immune escape the
capacity of the cell to escape the
immune system and grow or its malignant
growth potential or its abnormal
metabolic uh usage Etc and this
understanding converged in the
1990s with the idea that in fact when
you looked at these Pathways that are
abnormal in cancer cells you could
organize them into some Hallmarks um
this diagram keeps changing but just to
give you some sense of it um uh evading
immune destruction is a is a common
Hallmark that exists across multiple
cancers the instability of the genome
and the acquisition of mutations the
what's called replicative immortality
the capacity of the cell to grow over
cycles and cycles and Cycles um
inflammation the capacity of a cell to
pull out blood vessels and so forth I
won't dwell on the Hallmarks but again
the idea that cancers regardless of
where they exist or how they exist that
they may have some common features or
commonalities and in fact attacking some
of these might be relevant or
responsible for um for again new
generations of medicines and again to
liken that to um this this complex
machine um the the idea would be somehow
to jam up this Cog or or cut up this uh
this wheel and thereby arrest the
development or arrest the progression of
the cancer or the or the cancer movement
of the cancer itself so um that idea um
was tested was put to test in a trial
which I want to focus on sort of in the
last part of my talk because it's a very
important trial so that's called a
shiver trial how many people have heard
of this shiver trial um so it's an
important trial mainly because it was
negative U but I'll go through it um it
was done mostly in France um 741
patients they underwent molecular
profiling of individual cancers so their
individual cancers were Mo was
molecularly profiled um and then they
were given targeted therapy based on a
physician's choice so basically three
Pathways if you can imagine three of
these Pathways were identified 11 drugs
could be chosen based on the three
Pathways so you got nominated into one
of three Pathways you got you could have
11 drugs that were chosen so this was a
attempt number one as as as if as it
were to deliver personalized medicine
based on molecular molecular analysis of
individual cancer patients
um and the result unfortunately was
negative so this was a multicenter trial
it was a phase 2 trial and basically
there was no benefit for the
personalized arm versus the
non-personalized arm of this of this
trial this brought a a a huge set of
critiques um within the world of cancer
uh as I said it was an early trial but
it was it brought a huge set of
critiques and indeed if you looked at
the individual Pathways that were um
analized uh pi3 kinas inhibition hormone
receptor and Mech and irk n none of
these three individual Pathways was
personalized medicine in this uh context
s successful in changing the um survival
of it is survival I think survival or
progression free survival of
patients so this led to a nice editorial
which is called sitting shiva on the
Shiva trial uh um but more importantly
the question that was raised is a very
important question which is why did this
trial fail of course it's an early trial
it was you know was really early study
phase two study why did this trial was
not successful well one possibility and
so remember it is successful in
individual cancers so if you take breast
cancer and you annotate it
for estrogen receptor positivity versus
negativ negativity there's clearly a
signal that those patients will respond
to for instance stoopin if you take
leukemia which is BCR aable positive
it's very clear that those patients will
respond to GLE and yet if you now forget
the tissue of origin and you take
patients and you molecularly profile
them based on pathway analysis you've
suddenly lost some information such that
now your molecular annotation is no
longer successful so why one possibility
that patients develop resistance the
second possibility is that the drugs
were not potent enough we don't know how
to you don't have the right drugs for
pi3 Kines for instance we were giving
the wrong drugs they were developing
resistance for other reasons or that the
pathways are unknown unimportant or as I
said are tissue context specific so
they're specific so as I said to remind
us again tamoxifen Works spectacularly
in ER positive breast cancer but somehow
or the other when you lose that context
you now suddenly have a situation where
at least in this early trial it didn't
work so then the question is what do we
do if that's the
case so do we go back to combination
therapies do we go back to immune
therapies do we create more potent
pathway Inhibitors do we empirically
test cancer cells for their capacity to
respond or not respond or do we now
return back to primary and secondary
prevention and to some extent this is
where the field of to my in my
estimation this is where some of the
most interesting questions in cancer
therapy are sitting now should we deploy
combination therapies after molecularly
targeting or profiling cancers should we
use immune therapies which may or may
not care about what the mutations are
but will kill cancer cells based on some
other characteristics should we create
more potent pathway in are we us really
using the wrong drugs um should we
forget all of this maybe we don't know
any of this should be be testing um
individual cancer patients uh cancer
cells um or should we focus on primary
and secondary prevention as a as a
backup of course the answer is we're
doing all of these in parallel none of
them are exclusive with each other in
fact they intersect and interact with
each other and and in the last few
minutes I want to focus a little bit on
on these sort of five uh paradigms well
one Paradigm that combinations of
targeted therapies can work comes from
the multiple Myoma world and it's a very
powerful Paradigm so in fact if um this
is a this is an aggregate data from
multiple Myoma um about
survival proportion of survival if you
were diagnosed between 2001 to 2005
versus if you were diagnosed between
2006 to 2010 in fact I've seen more
recent update of this and if you were
diagnosed from 2015 onwards it seems to
be it's really early days sorry 2010
onwards it's really early days but
really the curve flattens out even more
so what happened in multiple Myoma well
one of the things that happened in
multiple Myoma is that it was one of the
first cancers where combinations of
targeted therapies were effectively
deployed um there are a variety of
reasons for this we can talk about that
afterwards but really what happened is
you know individual parts of that of the
multiple Myoma um U actually individual
um part of it was the in individuals
with multiple Myoma
uh contributed very very powerfully to
clinical trials it was an active
Consortium um and that continues even
today and has changed the landscape of
survival and multiple Mal it's one
disease where really we've seen in our
lifetime a dramatic change in in the
survival based on target largely based
on target therapies two maybe three
important targeted therapies and now
even new ones coming on
online um the second Paradigm is um
using immune therapy now the interesting
thing about immune therapies is of
course that these immune therapies are
um are largely not completely but
largely uh uh agnostic to the mutations
inside cells they recognize cancer cells
by virtue of abnormal characteristics of
the cancer cells that maybe reside on
the cell surface of the cancer cell
again abnormal physiology rather than
particularly caring about what the
mutation that's not absolutely true but
it's proven to be largely correct for
for in many cases there are two
variations of flavors of it either you
can engineer tea cells and re inject
them this is kind of a gene therapy uh
Paradigm in which you remove a te- cells
from a human being's body engineer them
to now become activated against the
cancer and re inject them into the
individual um one of the successes of
that has been the so-called cart T Cell
tea cells that have been um
re-engineered to become as Michelle
saddle and has called them living drugs
these are drugs that are these are cells
that are reinjected into a human being
and this is actually one of patient
zeros not the only there are several
patients in the first cohort Emma
Whitehead who Still Remains actually
she's profiled in the film Still Remains
in a really spectacular remission um
from these re-engineered cells that have
been reinjected back into her um she had
um tremendous relapsed uh acute
lymphoblastic leukemia really
recalcitrant to all therapies including
transplantation um and this is some data
from that I'll skip over that for a
second and the other version of that is
to not engineer te- cells outside the
body but to re-educate the te- cells to
attack the tumors within the body as
were um to resensitize them or to
reactivate them so that the uh cells can
be can go and Trigger and kill cancer
cells and that's based on the idea that
when a tumor tumor cells and te- cells
have a complex interaction and sometimes
in when they when they coexist the tumor
cell can can essentially create signals
that inactivate or make the cell make
the te- cell or the immune cells
insensitive to being detected by the by
the T cell so in other words it's like a
it's like a two-handed um handshake
which allows these cells to become
invisible to the immune system um this
interaction can be disrupted as we now
know by various medicines um and that
has led to um one of the things that I
had never suspected would happen in my
lifetime I had made a bet with someone
that during my lifetime we would never
see a successful therapy for smoking
related lung cancer um that had that had
that made any difference in fact I lost
that uh bet thankfully um because um in
the pivotal trial this is of uh of one
of these um U mechanism to disrupt the
interaction between the cancer cell and
the te- cell um you there's a survival
benefit in smoking in in lung cancer in
fact it remains true for smoking related
lung Cancers and uh and and in fact this
line flattens out and remains flat
actually the last I heard at the last
ASCO meeting remained flat at least now
for another one one year which means
that there is a hint that these patients
actually have real benefits that persist
over long periods of time um when
they're treated with these uh so-called
checkpoint Inhibitors what's interesting
about this that even these Inhibitors
are now uh uh getting a personalized
aspect to them so patients where where
you can actually see that these Pathways
of inhibition these kind of invisibility
the cloaks of invisibility are
particularly active can be identified as
a biomarker and what's interesting just
last week there was a paper showing that
um that in fact you can track the
resistance again to a genetic pathway
that's unique to certain cancer cells
and not to others so you can ask the
question UPF front and as the patient is
being treated who is responding who's
not responding to the therapy based on
the individual uh specimens of
cancer and then the the the the the the
final one um that I wanted to mention is
that you know occasionally this is
actually from our own Clinic um and I
talked a little bit about this in an
article in the New York Times in our own
Clinic we have um um started to where we
cannot find genetic markers um in in in
cancers that are predictive we've
decided we've started now looking at
large panels of drugs and asking the
question can we empirically decide or
Define which drugs are active against
cancer we extract the cancers from the
bone marrow in this case um test them
against about 750 drugs that have all
been FD approved at four doses and asked
the question um which ones are active or
inactive this is how that process works
I'll spare you the details we've tested
about 10 patients thus far and you know
once in a while with a couple of
patients you can Define uh new uh or
previously unannotated or unidentified
drugs that may be active and then we
have to requisition individual patients
we have to figure out how to pay for
them we have to requisition individual
patients to figure out how they're being
treated on these individual drugs and
how to Mark uh their individual
therapies it's a much more complicated
process than um that you might
anticipate so that really brings us back
to the the the the central question
which is public good which is um the
question that I'd asked which and that
is that really can we imagine a paradigm
in which we can use personalized
medicine at this scale at an individual
level scale to drive down the mortality
from cancer at least and what the
challenges in in that case are this is
something historically speaking it's a
paradigm that has never occurred in the
in in at least in the history of
medicine and the challenges remain
extremely steep um and therefore the
questions of of how to how to coordinate
the prevention detection and cure of
cancer remains even greater today as we
personalize um cancer medicine so um in
sort of coming to a conclusion we now
know that cancer physiology involves
several Hallmarks of cancer we think
that combining Hallmark Therapies in a
personalized way is likely to yield V
successes in this next phase but then
there's it is to be balanced against the
larger uh question that historically
this has not been an approach we've ever
used in with success with really any
other disease in the past few exceptions
aside I talked about one of them at
least in the past so what's happened as
a result of that is that we're shifting
paradigms although as I said we're
shifting them with a certain degree of
humility and a certain degree of
trepidation about what what happens next
of course there's an an attempt to as I
showed you before find responders versus
non-responders and then move them to
trial as opposed to the old method in
which you did the trial and then figured
out who was responding versus
non-responding um this is this will lead
to a deeper understanding of the science
and hopefully reduce the cost of failed
medicines because the medicines will be
appropriately directed to the
appropriate patients but the major
themes that remain is how do we counter
the costs how on Earth are we going to
figure out how to deliver medicine at
this scale if that's what what is
required how on Earth are we going to
deliver the the medicine at this scale
how will we handle resistance how do we
deal with maintenance not only
physiologically but in terms of cost and
ultimately whether we should return back
to paradigms of prevention it's not that
these are in exclusion of prevention but
to what extent we should return to
paradigms of prevention and early
treatment and early detection as we
enter an arena which seems clearly very
complex um um and yet some yet with with
with a lot of promise for certain
cancers um so I'll stop here um this was
an attempt to give you um a kind of
landscape view of where um some of the
uh some of the thoughts in cancer
biology are cancer medicine are going um
and open the floor to to questions that
that you might have thank you very much
so we now have time uh for a few
questions uh yes
thought
president
getent well it was implicit yes tell me
yeah so what do I think this new effort
yes how does this well so I'm going to
answer the question on the condition
that I get L to answer the question as
well
so because I think uh um I think it's
important to have a I think it's an
obviously an important moment we are as
as many of you know there's a vast Camp
there's a moonshot um campaign um it's a
little IL defined um I think at this
stage what moonot exactly means but many
of the principles that I talked about
are implicit in that moonshot campaign
so a deeper molecular understanding of
cancer including genetic and genomic
annotation followed by some kind of
personalized therapy for individual
cancers that was that's at least
implicit in in in the moonshot effort
there it's a much larger effort as as
you might know so I think it'll end up
with these questions the questions that
are in the moonshot effort are in fact
these questions how do we how do we de
how do we develop these therapies how do
we deliver the therapies how do we
manage the costs what do we deal with
maintenance what do we deal with
resistance and what role prevention has
one thing that I'm optimistic about in
in this and actually Lou and I were
talking about this is that one thing
that may happen and it would be very
helpful if it happened is that if we
begin to collapse the side
of prevention treatment and cure and by
that I mean the following um when you
detect an early cancer um could you at
that stage find a a a molecular
signature that would allow that
particular cancer patient to be treated
with some kind of aguin therapy which
would prevent the relapse of the cancer
in the in the in the distal setting so
in other words the idea of early
detection now uh Mish mashing or more
effectively coordinating with a a
therapeutic attempt um or as people have
pointed out uh trying to use um uh
various chemicals as agents for
prevention in particular highrisk groups
we've already had examples of that for
instance the use of hormonal modulation
in women at risk for breast cancer so
one thing that I will that I think will
maybe help is that if we take a
personalized approach to cancer
management not only at the late phases
of cancer when is so much tumor burden
that in fact many of these uh attempts
May Fail in the in the in the in the in
in any case but really move these
personalized medical uh paradigms as
early as possible to individual cancers
if that occurs I think we may be able to
manage some of the costs we may be able
to manage some of the and and get more
um effective treatments um for that to
occur actually much larger collaboration
is needed um because it it will not be
late stage or endstage cancer patients
being treated with combination therapies
that will not work what will H what will
have to happen is that early stage
cancer patients will have to be
identified or patients at risk will have
to be identified and appropriately
treated with the appropriate medicines
um for that if that happens I'm I'm more
optimistic I'm less optimistic based on
what we've seen so far um at at
delivering at a scale level Across the
Nation uh personalized therapies at this
stage I don't know what your thoughts
are yeah I agree with those comments um
just a a bit of perspective the total
amount it's not even clear yet what the
total amount of money there will be for
the moonshot but almost certainly it
will be far far less than is needed if
it's a billion dollars that sounds like
a lot of money but you know most
pharmaceutical companies spend a billion
dollars on cancer research every year
and so you're just adding to what other
companies are already doing now what if
however a billion dollars spent in a way
that forced us for every patient not
just patients on clinical trials but
every patient who gets a uh a therapy uh
particularly a an immune or a targeted
therapy to share that information in a
deidentified way in a centralized
database across every at least every
Cancer Center if not every hospital in
the United States uh would be immense
that would have it that would not cost
anything other than just the cost of
forcing people to share what they
already are doing anyway uh obviously
the bioinformatics necessary to
correlate these uh responses with
mutational events across millions of
patients instead of a clinical trial
where you're looking at a few thousand
patients uh is going to be difficult but
uh the opportunities to learn something
from that are immense so I think uh this
is I was asked for my advice by the new
NCI director and that's the advice I
gave him uh and Hope hopefully that
advice gets uh pushed
forward other
questions yes in front of and in the
backs so um both important questions um
so one thing is of course to be careful
about the data to start with so you have
to age adjust the data otherwise it you
begin to compare apples and oranges um
so in order to figure out the real
impact of chronic illnesses on mortality
the the the technically correct way to
do it is to appropriately age adjusted
because as you're saying the cohorts are
aging so therefore the weights have to
be appropriately assigned but um the
second question is do do I think there's
natural limits as you know this is a a
major AR debate that's broken out more
recently whether there whether humans
with now left with chronic medical
conditions are reaching a kind of age
limit as it were um or whether that um
age limit has been is is is is real or
artifactual uh there was a big paper in
nature last week I think which make the
argument that there's a plateauing of
age um there was a reanalysis of that
very same data um and that showed that
in fact the plateauing was artifactual
so we really don't know whether there's
any natural age limit to uh human beings
dying of chronic diseases we what we do
know however is that in chronic diseases
when interventions are successful they
can be very successful the great example
of course is cardiac disease and cardiac
disease the mortality of cardiac disease
has been driven down dramatically over
the last 10 20 odd years and then it has
actually plateaued as well but the
dramatic decrease in cardiac disease
using a combination of Lifestyle
therapies Lifestyles um some impact of
uh among other things cholesterol
monitoring and and and decreasing agents
but really driven by life lifestyle
changes has been dramatic so U we have
examples in which um chronic diseases
have been altered the epidemiology of
chronic diseases has been altered during
our own own lifetime the problem as I
showed with cancer is of course the
cancer is a is a unique chronic disease
it's a chronic disease unlike any
chronic disease partly driven by the
genetic diversity and partly driven by
the idea by the fact that we don't have
effective medicines for many many many
cancers right
now in the back
yeahor inal medicine September you got
an
questioning the whole Paradigm of
personalized cancer treatment saying
that more or less it's not really
biologically feasible all the reasons
you've indicated many mut the the
cancers are inevitably going to find
resistance
whatever Pathways we attack and it's not
really a worthwhile route to to follow I
wonder if you have any well we have many
thoughts on that in fact part of the
presentation is a reaction to that um
that that idea that's been around I I I
I personally I sit in the middle um I
think that U I think the reality is that
yes this is a complex problem as I
demonstrated but um certainly in
individual cancers where appropriate
therapies have been um directed um there
have been uh Landmark successes um we've
shown some of those landmark successes
um cancer patients have benefited from
those landmark successes I think it is
possible to De to develop personalized
medicines against cancers um and that
involves a combination of immunological
therapies metabolic therapies lifestyle
changes and uh potentially other
targeted therapies stringing them
together in the appropriate sequence the
question of whether they can whether
they can be deployed at scale uh to make
a dent in those large curves of of at a
population level is a much much more
difficult question um I'm more I'm I'm
I'm less optimistic about that but I I
do not think that we should certainly
from my standpoint our far from uh
giving up the idea that these medicines
can be deployed appropriately in in in
appropriate groups of cancer
patients yeah again love to have a
comment on that yeah I I think the I'm
always an optimist uh that uh we can uh
do better with tools that we have uh we
need better tools for sure uh the
advantage of targeted therapies over
chemotherapy and and at least
therapeutic doses of radiation is you
preserve
potentially preserve the immune system
and I think in the end if if we treated
uh bacterial
infections uh with antibiotics that the
first thing they did was kill all of
your immune cells and then they also
killed some of the bacteria we would
always fail we would the bacteria would
develop resistance uh and ultimately
unless the immune system was there to
wipe up what was left uh we would never
be successful in treating uh bacterial
infections so I think we have to think
about cancer in the same way you've got
to preserve the immune system or enhance
the immune system with the same therapy
that you attack the cancer uh so the
question is you know we're not paying
attention to that you know how many
people know what their targeted therapy
does to their immune system uh I think
the second point is one that Sid made
about early intervention being so
critical uh it's the same thing with the
bacterial infections if bacterial
infection is too far along you're not
going to rescue the patient the immun
system system is
overwhelmed uh the antibiotic even IV is
not going to to be sufficient and that's
when we do most of our clinical trials
uh we do our clinical trials in patients
who' failed standard of care that means
they've been hit with three or four
rounds of radiation chemotherapy mutated
the hell out of the cancer now you have
hundreds and hundreds of mutations or
thousands of mutations more than were
present when the disease was first
detected uh so detecting early treat
early with targeted therapies that spare
the immune system in my opinion is where
we have a chance to win and the
herceptin example is good with that you
know you saw the data on the trial uh
was in stage disease virtually nobody
survived uh and now that we have it as
adant therapy uh it's some I think the
last numbers I heard are
95% survive go long term without relapse
five or 10 years so that's uh you know I
think we have to learn from that glec is
given as CML is still a stable disease
if in Blast crisis it doesn't work and
yet we're looking at blast crisis for
most of the therapies we're giving so we
need to go earlier uh and it's got to be
more scientific we've got to pay
attention to what's happening to the
immune system and so I'm The Optimist
that I'll agree the way we're doing it
now we're not seeing as much impact as
we we were hoping but I think part of it
is we're just not administering even the
breast drugs in the best way and
certainly I ideas that were very
hubristic maybe five or 10 years ago
which is you know early detection for
the sake of early detection as you know
is useless you can detect a tumor early
if you've nothing to do about that early
detection it makes no difference to a
patient um early detection with badly
targeted therapies or inappropriate or
inadequate or ineffective Target
therapies is similarly useless um so
this whole Paradigm will only work if
you match um the the the earliest
possible detection of cancers um with
the appropriate molecular profiling if
you can achieve molecular profiling
which you can these days with very small
amounts of of of material um and then
use the appropriate uh molecular therapy
uh to that but now the question is
Imagine delivering that at scale um
across a huge uh very obviously
economically uh and geographically
diverse population that is those are
challenges that we haven't even faced
yet but we will face once these
therapies become even more even
marginally actionable so I'm not I'm not
a pessimist about personalized medicine
I disagree with the with the new Eng
editorial in fact there are plenty of
examples in the cancer world even with
Advanced cancers such as you know
multiple myON usually presents as
symptomatic disease um that you can have
partly targeted Therapies in multiple
maloma they are not targeted against
enogen generally um they're partly
pathway Target therapies but they're
successful in that disease and they've
turned around some of the mortality of
the disease not all of it but I've
that
disease okay I just make the one comment
that uh probably all cancer therapies
are targeted it's just in many cases we
don't know what the target
is uh so with that uh Sid thank you
again for fantastic